during his earthly ministry, Jesus expelled demons. He healed the sick. He fed
multitudes. He even raised the dead. But was he known as the great demon
expeller, the great healer, the great feeder of multitudes, or the great
resurrector? No. But he was known as the great teacher. Why? Because he focused
primarily his efforts on the preaching and teaching work. But now, why did he do
this? Well, he knew physical miracles would only bring temporary benefits. He
knew once freed from the demons, ones that were healed, fed, even resurrected,
would eventually grow old and die. So how could he help people permanently? Well,
he knew only he could do it by teaching them the life-saving knowledge about
his father, Jehovah. He well knew the truthfulness of what he stated as
recorded at John 17-3. This means everlasting life. They're coming to know the
only true God and of the one he sent, Jesus Christ. So even though he did many
amazing things, he focused primarily on the preaching and teaching work,
becoming the greatest teacher ever to walk this earth. In fact, when officers
were sent to arrest him, remember what happened? They came back empty handed. Why?
Well, they said, never has any man spoken like this. They were so awestruck by his
teaching. They couldn't even bring themselves to arrest him. Large crowds would
stick with him for days, even without eating, in order to listen to his teaching.
In contrast to the quality of Jesus' teaching, Acts chapter 20 tells us about the
apostle Paul giving a long, long talk. And during that talk, remember the young
man Uticus sank into a deep, deep sleep and even fell out of the third story
window of a building. Now, of course, Paul resurrected him, but probably he felt
responsible for putting him to sleep like that. But no offense to Paul. I'm sure he
was doing the best he could. But obviously his teaching was not on a par with
that of the great teacher. And that makes me think of what a brother said to me in
a teasing way. He said, brother, I always look forward to your talks. I know I'm
going to wake up totally refreshed. Well, it's really true. None of us, like Paul,
can begin to match the quality of teaching of the great teacher. But what are we
told at first Peter 221? We are told to follow his steps closely. We can't do it
perfectly, but we're told to do it as closely as we can. So that means that all
of us, but especially as we're talking to you dear Gilead students, soon to be
graduates, you must make the preaching and teaching work a priority. And we must
do our best. You must do your best to improve in your teaching. And how can you do
that by imitating the great teacher? During this talk, even though much of what
we will talk about will concern the public ministry, what we're going to discuss, much
of it would be applicable to teaching on a personal level and in the congregation. So
especially you brothers, but all of us, we want to imitate Jesus teaching methods as
we shepherd Jehovah sheep on a personal level. And as we do so on a congregational level
from the platform. Now here's a question, how did Jesus become the great teacher? Well,
the Bible tells us that for eons and eons of time, as a master worker beside the Jehovah,
he carefully observed and he imitated his father. And he thereby acquired amazing
teaching skills. See, he learned from the greatest teacher. And no wonder he became
the great teacher. He learned from his heavenly father. And he appropriately gave credit
where it belonged. A go to John chapter eight, please. And notice how he gave the credit
for his speaking and teaching where it belonged. John ate the be part of verse 28. I do nothing
of my own initiative. But just as a father taught me, I speak these things. Yes, he imitated
his father. Now we want to imitate him. But what specific teaching methods did he utilize?
Did he learn from the greatest teacher? Well, let's discuss four. Now one, he taught
with enthusiasm and conviction. Matthew 729, for he was teaching them as a person having
authority and not as there's scribes. So did not indicate enthusiasm, conviction, authority,
he taught. So if we're not enthusiastic about what we teach in the ministry or from the
platform, how can we expect our listeners to be enthusiastic about it? So never would
we want to come across half-hearted in our teaching. Just like enthusiastic teaching is contagious,
half-hearted teaching is contagious too, isn't it? You could perhaps liken it to yawning.
The one person yawning in a room pretty soon everybody's yawning. And that could be the
way with half-hearted teaching. But as a caution, we don't want to be theatrical in our speaking.
That means we wouldn't want to use extreme gestures or dramatic expressions, overly theatrical,
even theatrical. Why? Because now you end up drawing attention to yourself, don't you?
Rather than to what we're teaching. And that's emphasis in the wrong place, isn't it? But now
let's talk about a second method, the great teacher utilized. He was a good listener. Where did he
learn this pattern of being a good listener? We'll open up to Isaiah chapter 50, please. And notice
what it's prophetically said about Jesus and where he learned to be a good listener. Notice
chapter 50 and right at the end of verse 4, let's begin there. He, Jehovah, awakens my ear to listen
like the taut ones. The sovereign Lord, Jehovah, has opened my ear and I was not rebellious.
I did not turn in the opposite direction. So Jehovah opened his ear, trained in to be a good
listener and he responded well, did he? Not. And that's why when he became a human,
from childhood on, he continued his pattern of being a good listener, didn't he? You recall the
account in Luke chapter 2, when Joseph and Mary finally found Jesus after three days and he's
only 12 years old, where do they find him? It says he was sitting in the midst of the teachers there
in the temple and listening to them and then also asking them questions. Then when he began his
career as a disciple maker at 30, it was second nature, wasn't it? To be a good listener. Now think
of this, even though he had more to say than any other human has ever had to say, he knew the value
of pausing, drawing out his audience and then really listening to them. And the same is true
with us. See, you may think, especially after Gilead's school, you've got a lot to say.
But if you're going to imitate the great teacher, we have to use self-control, we have to pause
and draw people out and then really listen to them. And when we serve as an assistant, which
sometimes is half the time, we want to be active listeners. See, what does that mean to be an
active listener? Well, maybe you would nod periodically in agreement. Or maybe you would add
some little comment, well, it's very interesting. You might even ask for clarification. People like
to clarify what they're saying, say, shows you're really interested in what's happening. So whether
we're the one presenting or the one as an assistant, we want to be an active listener. There's probably
nothing more distracting than having you're an assistant playing with a dog. Or maybe looking down
the street, see what's happening down the street. Pretty soon your householders looking down the street,
see what's happening. See, be an active listener. Well, let's get our third method, the great teacher
used. He used thought-provoking questions. And methods two and three do go hand-to-hand, don't they?
Because if you ask good questions, you're likely going to have more to listen to. But why do some
of Jehovah's people tend to shy away perhaps from using questions? Why do they just like to present
information, kind of control everything? Well, if you think about it, it's probably easier to just
present information, even though not nearly as effective. See, when you ask questions and then you
get a response from the householder, it's kind of like bouncing a football. Now, you bounce a basket
ball is predictable. It's not a football. And the same way, people come back with all kinds of
responses. And you've got to be willing and able to adapt according to their responses. Some don't
like that uncertainty. So they would rather just present information. But as we said, that's not
going to be nearly as effective as those who have learned to imitate the great teacher and effectively
teach with questions. Now, you Gilead students have certainly seen the value of good questions during
class. See, it made it so much more enjoyable, didn't it? And it enhanced your learning tremendously
when your instructors use these good questions. Why is that more effective to proficiently use
questions? Well, for one thing, you involve your listener in the conversation. And what do you
enjoy more being given a sermon or being involved in a conversation? Answer's obviously that.
So you involve the listener more enjoyable. Another thing, you gain valuable information
about your listener, which you can use to really help that one. Well, what are types of questions
we can use? You can use what do you think questions? Jesus used them as an example, Matthew 1812,
what do you think? If a man has 100 sheep, one strays, we know the rest of the illustration,
but he started out, what do you think? And people generally like to give their opinion.
And in a sense, there's no wrong answer, is it? Because whatever they say, that's what they think.
That's what you ask for, right? You ask, what do you think? And people like to give their opinion,
it makes it enjoyable. You can also use multiple choice questions. That sometimes makes it easier
for the householder to answer. Jesus gave an example in Matthew 1725. He said, Simon,
from whom did the kings of the earth receive duties or headtax from their sons or from the strangers?
Many of our tracks use multiple choice questions, don't they? And we can effectively use those.
And if you think about it, the right question can often enable us to overcome potential
conversation stoppers and keep the conversation going. For example, if a person says,
you people don't believe in Jesus, we might say, well, may I please ask, what do you say that?
Does someone tell you that about us? See, harmless questions can keep that conversation going
until you get valuable information that perhaps you can use to help the person.
The person says, I don't believe in the Bible. May I please ask, why you feel that way?
May I ask, how long have you felt that way? See, keep it going. One brother said during
Pioneer's School, he had those questions drilled into his head about why do you feel that way?
How long have you felt that way? A woman came to the door, said, I can't talk him pregnant.
And he says, well, may I ask, how long you felt that way? Don't do that. We said before,
you got to be a good listener. But then what about using thought-provoking questions when conducting
a Bible study? As you well know, our new study book is loaded with thought-provoking questions,
and we certainly want to fully utilize them. But occasionally, we may need to add auxiliary
questions. But remember, most of what a good teacher says during a Bible study is in the form
of questions. I know myself, I've really tried hard to train myself when I'm about ready to make
a statement, say something, wait a minute, let me change that, let me change it to a question,
and let me draw out from the student what I was about to say. See, that's going to be more
effective, isn't it? It's normally much better than explaining a scripture to a student having
the student explain it to you. And don't be afraid of a little silence. See, if you ask a question
and they're silence, some of us think, well, we have to quickly fill in the gap by saying something.
But if they're thinking, let them think. Of course, you have to know your student.
If they have no clue what the answer is, then don't let them just sit there and sizzle.
Throw them a rope, throw them an auxiliary question. But now, we're going to go to our fourth
method that the great teacher learned from the greatest teacher he effectively used illustrations.
And that was certainly a powerful teaching tool, indeed. Matthew 1334,
without an illustration, Jesus would not speak. But here's a question. Do you think that Jesus
illustrations were the product of spur of the moment thinking? Well, there's no doubt about it.
It is perfect brain certainly helped to be able to come up with amazing illustrations. But
nevertheless, the indication is that he cultivated the ability to effectively use illustrations if
he saw a shepherd, for example, taking care of a sheep. He likely meditated, now, how can I use this
situation to teach vital truths? He did the same when he saw, for example, a fisherman letting down
his nets, a farmer sewing seed, maybe builders constructing a tower. See, how can I use this in
make powerful illustrations to teach vital truths? Even simple items like birds, lilies, a lamp
on a lampstand, a wine skin, leaven, mustard seed, salt, the young child. How can I use these simple
items to teach vital truths? And he was amazing how he how he did that. And the same is true with
us. See, all around us, if we train ourselves to think that way, there are circumstances,
there are situations, there are even just items that we can use and make them into powerful
illustrations, and we can powerfully elevate the quality of our teaching. Now, here's an example.
Some time ago, a brother noticed a little baby with a pacifier. This pacifier had been dipped
in sugar water, put in the baby's mouth, and he was thinking, you know, that's a very good illustration
of many, many in Christendom. They're satisfied what they have, even though they have no real
spiritual nourishment. But we're looking for those who are not satisfied, those who are conscious
of their spiritual need. And he was able to use that in a talk. Where are cautions
regarding the use of illustrations? Well, here's just a couple. An illustration should not be too
long or complicated. If it is, simplify it or discard it. That's what the school guidebook tells us.
Here's another caution. To be effective, the illustration must be familiar to
and fit your audience. For example, what if he used the illustration, Satan's system is like
a male platypus. Now, in some parts of Australia, that might be a good illustration.
Because they know a male platypus looks harmless, he looks innocent, but his nine legs are armed
with ankle spurs, connected to venom glands. So he looks harmless, but he could be very dangerous.
But that only works, see, if you're dealing with people that are familiar with that particular
animal. But skillfully selected and used illustrations are very effective. They stimulate thinking,
they arrest and hold attention, they motivate the heart and conscience of our listener,
and they serve as powerful memory aids. See, a good illustration is going to be remembered years
later along with, and this is an important thing, along with a point that it was designed to highlight.
Well, there we have four teaching methods utilized by the great teacher that he learned from the
greatest teacher as we said. And we want to do our best to copy, imitate his way of teaching. And I
know you give students, you have an enhanced desire to do that in the congregation and also in your
your territory that you're going to be working again. So let's work hard to teach with enthusiasm
and conviction. Let's be a good listener. Let's use thought provoking questions.
And let's use effective illustrations. If you work hard, your dear students almost graduates,
to employ these same teaching techniques, then you're going to be a lot more skillful in reaching the
hearts of your listeners. And there's a lot at stake, isn't it? I mean, you think about it,
the lives of our brothers and sisters are at stake. And with the art of teaching, learn from the
great teacher, we want to help as many of them as we can to make it into that new world.
And then also the lives of honest, started ones in our territory. They hang in the balance, don't they?
So we want to find them before it's too late. And using the art of teaching, learn from the great
teacher, we want to motivate them to come into the safety of Jehovah's organization. And if you
think about it, it's good to remember that what we're doing now in the way of learning to teach
is really preparing us for the greatest teaching campaign ever in all human history,
the teaching of billions who will be coming back in the resurrection. You could say, our work now
is like a warm-up, isn't it? It's a warm-up for that greatest teaching campaign that is just
around the corner. So please, continue to observe carefully the teaching of the great teacher,
and you learn a lot about that in school. No doubt about it. And make Jehovah continue to bless you,
most beloved. Gilead students, almost graduates, may he bless you as you apply all the wonderful
things you've learned during this school. And that includes learning to imitate the great teacher.